CONTRACT BETWEEN MAXIS AND DUX SOFTWARE

Here are the interesting parts of the 9 page contract, signed by Robert
B Adams of DUX and Jeff Braun of Maxis on July 19th 1991, which I can
scan and send to you in its entirety if you like.

As far as I know, the terms of the contract were successfully met, and
there were no problems with it.


SOFTWARE LICENSING/DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into this __July_19th_1991__ between,
Sim-Business, a California Corporation, doing business as Maxis, with a
place of business at Two Theatre Square Suite 230, Orinda California,
94563, ("Licensor"), and DUX Software Corporation, ith a place of
business at 4546 El Camino Real Suite W, Los Altos California 94022,
("Pyblisher") who hereby agrees as follows:

1. Introduction

Licensor has developed the computer software described in Exhibit A
attached hereto, and is interested in granting to Publisher an exclusive
license to convert and translate to the Unix/X environment, and copy,
reproduce, modify, manufacture, market, publish, distribute, sell, and
use the converted software, all subject to the terms and conditions of
this Agreement.

2. Definitions

(a) "Original Work" the English language version of the computer program
described in Exhibit A, including the manual, artwork, promotional
materials, software routines and algorithms and any related materials
deigned to operate on computers described in Exhibit A.
(b) "Program": A Unix/X Windows Version of the Orignial Work. The
Program shall remain the property of the Licensor.
(c) "Unit Sales": The total number of units of the Program.
(d) "New Version": An updated or improved version of the Program.
(e) "Translated Version": The Program, or New Version of the Program
translated into a language other than English.
(f) "Derivative Work": Any product that is based on or derived from the
Program of which contains code from the Program is considered a
derivative of the program.
(g) "Sales Receipts": The gross monies actually received by Publisher
(exclusive of sales, use, excise, VAT, withholding and other taxes,
packing, insurance, shippping and similar charges reimbursed by
customers) from all sales, development fees, leases or licenses of the
Program, New and Translated Versions, Conversions, and Derivative Works,
less: (i) sales commissions paid to independent sales representatives;
(ii) the amount of any credits or refunds for returns, taking into
account any reserves previously established by Publisher; (iii) any
credits, discounts, rebates and promotional allowances to customers; and
(iv) the amount of any sales or use taxes required to be paid or
withheld by Publisher with respect to the payments due to Licensor. The
amounts dedicated under items (i) through (iv) above will be reasonable
and cinsistent with the amounts customarily paid in the industry.
(h) "Conversions": Adaptations of the Program and Incorporated
Procedures for use on the machines or operating systems other than those
specified in Exhibit A.
(i) Territory: Worldwide.

3. Grant of Rights

(a) Subject to the terms of this Agreement, Licensor hereby grants
Publisher (i) an exclusive, license to copy, reproduce, modif, enhance,
manufacture, market, publish, distribute, sell, and use the Program in
the Territory.
(b) Licensor retains all rigts to the Program. Publisher may not use
portions of the Program without prior written permission from Licensor,
other than as is consistent
with the rights granted in this Agreement.
(c) To use Licensor's trademarks or symbols, if any, where necessary for
promotion of the Program.
(d) To modify the English language version of the Original Work as
Publisher deems appropriate to meet the needs of the market for the
Territory.

4. Delivery

(a) Delivery of the Original Work and Supporting Materials. Within
thirty (30) days of execution of this Agreement, Licensor shall deliver
the following supporting materials: (i) the complete Macintosh, DOS and
Windows source code listings for the Original Work in machine readable
format; (ii) supporting documentation for the Original Work including
the format, organization and content of the master diskettes; (iii) the
name of any person or entity, other than Licensor, who has participated
in or contributed to the authorship of the Original Work; and (iv) all
promotional materials and artwork currently in use by Licensor to
promote the Original Work. Publisher is responsible for all testing of
the Program.

5. Payments.

(a) Advances. There are no advances in consideration of this Agreement.
(b) Quarterly Payments. [...]
(c) Accounting. [...]
(d) Inspection of Publisher's Records. [...]
[There is no part (e)]
(f) Payments [...]

6. Licensor's Obligations.

(a) Consultation. [...]
(b) Related Works. [...]


7. Copyright, New and Translated Versions.

(a) Licensor shall retain all rights in any New or Translated Vversions
developed by Publisher. Licensor shall cooperate wand assist with the
acquisition of language translation text for purposes of localization of
the Program.
(b) Publisher agrees to take all actions and cooperate as is necessary
to protect the copyrightability of the Program, and any software and
materials provided under this Agreement, and further agrees to execute
any documents that might be necessary to perfect Licensor's ownership of
copyrights in the Program and to registration.

8. Warranties and Indemnification.

(a) Title. [...]
(b) LICENSOR MAKES NO WARRANTIES [...]

9. Marketing.

(a) Determinations by Publisher. [...]
(b) Publisher's Marketing Efforts. [...]
(c) Licensor's Copyrights. [...]
(d) Credit. [...]
(e) Publisher to secure copyright protection for the Program in the
Territory.

10. Infringement.

In the event of any infringement [...]

11. Terms and Termination.

(a) Terms. The term of this Agreement shall commence on the date hereof
and shall, unless sooner terminated, continue for a term of ten (10) years.

(b) Effect of Termination. Publisher will have the right to retain
copies of the Program and any version of the Program developed by
Publisher for Publisher's own use and for the purpose of providing
support for customers existing at the time of termination. Publisher
shall have a period of six (6) months to dispose of existing inventory
from the date of termination.

(i) Publisher's Right to Terminate. [...]
(ii) Licensor's Right to Terminate. [...]
(iii) Termination in Event of Bankruptcy. [...]

12. Confidentiality.

(a) Retention of Proprietary Rights in Confidential Information. [...]
(b) Confidentiality. [...]
(c) Information Not Protected. [...]

13. Agreement not to Constitute Joint Venture.

Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as making either Publisher,
or Licensor the agent of, on in joint vengture with, the other for any
purpose.

14. Administrative Provisions.

This Agreement represents the full and complete understanding [...]

13. Licensor's Copies [The section numbering jumps back to 13]


At the time of inital publication and distribution of the Program,
Publisher shall deliver ten (10) copies of each final to-be-shipped
Program the Licensor at no charge. Licensor shall also have the right to
purchase from Publisher a reasonable number of copies of the Program, at
current manufacturing cost. Licensor shall also be entitled to receive
four (4) copies of the final to-be-shipped Program each time a
revisedversion is released and shipped.

14. Assignment.

This Agreement and the rights and obligations hereunder shall not be
assigned in whole or in part bu either party without the prior written
consent of the other, [...]

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement as
of the date dfirst above written.

[LICENSOR] Jeff Braun
Date: July 19, 1991
By: Jeff Braun
Title: President

[PUBLISHER] Robert B Adams
Date: July 19, 1991
By: Robert B Adams
Title: President


EXHIBIT A

1. Program Specifications

The program is the program currently shipping in the United States on
the Macintosh computer, called SimCity.

2. Microcomputers

The Program shall execute on Workstations running the Unix Operating
systems, networked PC workstations functioning solely as X Windows
displays, and Intel microprocessors based workstations (i386/i486
processors) executing variants of the Unix Operating System, or display
systems such as Motif and OpenLook, either directly, or on top of MS-DOS.

Specifically excluded from the list of Microcomputers are those relying
solely upon the MS-DOS command shell, Microsoft Windows, and other
MS-DOS Graphical User Interface based shells, or Command Line Interface
shells.


EXHIBIT B - PAYMENTS

1. Advances and Delivery Schedule. There are no advances considered for
this agreement. Publisher shall make its best efforts to effect the
publication of the Program within twelve (12) months of the effective
date of this Agreement.

2. Payments: Except as provided below, Publisher shall make payments to
Licensor based on Publisher's Sales Receipts with respect to all sales,
leases, licenses, or other transactions pursuant to which copies of the
Program, New or Trranslated Versions, Conversions, or Derivative Works
are distributed.

(a) Ten and one half percent (10.5%) of Sales Receipts from Publisher's
distribution of finished units of the Program, including any language
translation of the Software that Publisher distributes.e collection of
overdue payments,

3. Replacements for Defects or Damages: [...]

4. Promotional Units: [...]

5. Any failure to make payments when due pursuant to this section shall
result in a late charge equal to 1.5% per month, or the maximum amount
permitted by law, whichever is less, on the unpaid balances. In
addition, Licensor shall pay all costs incurred by Licensor in the
collection of overdue payments, including attorney's fees and costs.
