To: jag, patl, owen, rxb, mackay, powell, hvr
Subject: Re: Status of NeWS
--text follows this line--
   Date: Fri, 1 Nov 91 10:41:55 +0100
   From: knut@forit.forut.no

Knut, I just quit my job at Sun because Sun's managment is living a
lie. Their words say they support NeWS, but their actions testify to
just the opposite. There are many people in Sun who want quite badly
to kill NeWS, and they have been trying to do that while at the same
time giving lip service to NeWS, so they don't get fired. McNealy and
other top level executives say they support NeWS, and say they will
fire anyone who tries to kill it. So everyone pretends to be behind it
to keep their job, while continuing to sabotage it. It is a very
unpleasant and unfortunate situation.

   Pat,

   Since the early days of Sundew (1986) my hopes for NeWS and TNT has
   been very high. IT is good to see some from within Sun still is
   advocating the system in netland.  The activity on
   comp.windows.news has been low over the last months. Bad rumors
   frequently pops up in my mailbox.  The company is criticized for
   not pushing NeWS hard enough.  NeWSPrint and FrameMaker are good
   signs. More is needed.  A bewildered market needs convincing
   applications. Where has HyperNeWS gone?

Sun was going to buy HyperNeWS from Turing and develop it into a
wonderful environment. But the VP in charge of making the decision
missed the deadline, so he gave himself another deadline, and then
dumped it (so it didn't look like Sun dumped HyperNeWS just because he
missed the deadline).

   Can developers risk their future on NeWS/TNT.  

Well one of the main reasons Sun isn't dumping TNT is that Frame would
sue them if they did. So I don't know how much of a future there is
for NeWS. I don't know when the managers at Sun will decide it's worth
getting sued by Frame in order to get rid of NeWS (or figure out a way
to dump it that they won't get sued).

   The sad fact of this industry is that right or wrong in highly
   technical matters seems to be settled by marketing success or
   failure. Remember Cobol.  X10 and then x11 did - regardless of
   technical merits - hit the marketplace just when "open windowing"
   was desperately needed. It has by now a position similar to what
   COBOL had in the late 60-ties. Its documentation is said to
   encompass some 6000 pages.  I have no idea of the source code
   volume.  It is a heavy burden for both human and machine resources.

   Personally, I hope Sun still believe in its role as a defender
   of conceptual economy and its power to maintain a leading role
   in establishing industrial standards based on scientific sound
   principles. If good and bad is mainly defined by marketing powers
   computing is more like politics and less  high technology founded on
   science.

Sun Microsystems is in business to sell hardware, and SunSoft is in
business to supply software for Sun Microsystems to run, and maybe
make a few bucks on the side selling the same old shrink wrapped shit
to whoever else will buy it. The main goal of SunSoft's main customer
is to sell as many tons of hardware as possible, and big bloated
software sells big bloated machines.  Read the DOE/DOMF announcement.
Draw your own conclusions.

   I believe we have seen in the past that software dinosaurs are
   difficult to hide under the carpet. It is simply not enough to feed
   them more cpu cycles.  If Sun gives up on actively promoting NeWS
   and TNT as an API, the stand of the company in the advanced
   industry and scientifically inclined market will not be the same.
   NeWS in many ways represents the essence of software enginering
   research over the last 20 years applied in the fields of
   interactive graphics.  In my opinion it has great potentials for
   object oriented (OO) databases applications too.  In distributed
   applications, the NeWS/PostScript interpretative OO methods offers
   an new opportunity to use object instances and their class
   definitions as dynamically defined standards for information
   interchange.  Hence, we could exchange data and their meaning as
   one entity (objects) in open network environments instead of
   interchanging data based on a priori agreedments on their
   interpretations. This will give us much needed flexibility.

That's one of the reasons we were given for Sun dumping HyperNeWS:
HyperNeWS is *very* object oriented, and if we come out with a product
*that* object oriented, *so* soon, before the 100% vaporware DOE/DOMF has
had a chance to crustalize into millions of lines of code and link
into every application on the desktop, that would confuse the
customers. Sun is "commited" (in the institutional sense of the term)
to delivering a totally object oriented environment in the future.
HyperNeWS is much too far in the present to be compatible with those
goals.

   I hope rumors on tipping NeWS and TNT in Openwindows3.0 is simply
   not true, - or is it?

False rumors. TNT 3.0 is included with OpenWindows 3.0. It will take
them quite some time and several lawsuites to get rid of NeWS.

   I would appreciate if Suns officially announced commitment with
   regard to NeWS/TNT for the upcoming releases and the Solaris
   announcement could be summarized and posted.

There was a recent Solaris announcement that mentioned NeWS and TNT.
It is just a statement of fact that NeWS and TNT are included with
OpenWindows 3.0. But if you hear anything saying that sun *supports*
NeWS and TNT, that is just a lie.

   Knut Skog                        

   Professor of Comp. Sc.
   Senior research scientist

   PS

   In order not to serve speculative interests I do not post this to
   the net. Feel free to use this statement of opinion as you like.

   DS

Thanks -- please don't post this reply either. I feel I owe you this
explination of my opinion, because I have told you different, more
hopeful things in the past, based on my opinion that was formed around
the lies I was told. Of course, this is just my opinion, who am I to
know what's *really* going on? The people in charge certainly aren't
telling.

