To: sevans@alydar
Bcc: hopkins
In-reply-to: Steve Evans's message of Wed, 10 Jul 91 10:32:01 PDT <9107101732.AA03013@alydar.Eng.Sun.COM>
Subject: A story
--text follows this line--
> I'm a consumate optimist.  I keep thinking that the NeWS focus can be
> directed to ISV's, not research centers.

The research centers are all you have left once you've driven away the
ISV's. You drive them away by making promise after promise you never
keep. When I read the SunView 2.0 Directions Statement, dated 6
October 1986, I respected Sun for having the guts and the brains to do
what's right. What a joke. Little did I know it was only the first
joke in a long series. We told our customers we were not going to
screw them, that we would stick to the API that we had documented. You
had your chance to change that API a long time ago, but you waited
until now to press it. It's the same thing all over again, except now
it's me who's repeating the lies to our customers.

>	If you don't want to dump NeWS, then why have you been caused
>	us so much trouble?
>
> I could ask you the same question, "If you want NeWS to be a commercial
> success, why has NeWSTech been so subborn in the sense of resisting
> trying to fit into the X environment."

That's not the same question.  We want NeWS to be a commercial
success, but "commercial success" is not a standard defined by the X
Consortium. I think OWM can do a beautiful job of fitting the X
environment into NeWS. If you find that concept terrifying, then you
know how we feel about the inverse, knowing that we will have to give
up many goals we designed for and successfully achieved, in order to
accomodate a half assed "fallback" solution to satisfy some of our
customers who want to run our competitors' software (because we aren't
allowed to make our software good enough for them to want to run).

We have had a great deal of trouble *trying* to fit into the X
environment. It has taken a huge amount of PostScript code to deal
with many X interoperability issues ranging from *undocumented*
selection protocols that XView and OLIT can't even agree on, to input
focus grabbing kludges to work around OLWM's *incorrect* focus
tracking behavior, to the fullscreen.ps hack to keep X from grabbing
the pointer when NeWS is tracking it.  Then there are problems we
could do nothing about, like the system locking up when OLWM grabs the
server (grabbing the pointer *after* grabbing the server, and not
checking the return value). Many of these problems should have been
addressed by fixing X programs or the server, but they were not,
instead we had to code around them in PostScript when we could.

We've needed help, but haven't gotten it.  Like operators to convert
between NeWS and X time values.  We asked for that a while ago but
still don't have it. So we're stuck using this slow crufty PostScript
conversion routine. We also need a way to grab the pointer, like X, so
we don't have to muck up all the mouse tracking code with the
fullscreen.ps kludge. But we still don't have that either, as if we
didn't really "need" pointer grabbing because we could kludge around
the deficiency. But now that pointer grabbing is framed as solving X
interoperability problems, it's suddenly an acceptable thing to ask
for (as long as we implement it with our own resources). Several of
our interoperability problems were caused by OLWM's misbehavior, bugs
that nobody cared to fix. Some of those bugs are finally being
addressed, and this is progress, but it's years overdue, and
cooperation on those issues was very hard for us to get. Why is it too
much to ask for you to go to bat *for* us, instead of going to battle
*against* us? 

We have this wonderful technology but nobody understands how to use it
or how to improve it. NeWS can be used to *solve* many of the problems
with X.  DSDM could be implemented in NeWS, and it would be *much*
faster (watch the context switches in a perfmeter when you press on a
drop target). If it can't be implemented trivially in NeWS, you could
add NeWS operators for Xlib style region arithmetic, and access to the
shapes extension.  Not only would X drag'n'drop performance improve
dramatically, but many NeWS programs would benefit from access to the
technology that's *already* implemented in the merged server (like
pattern fill). 

If NeWS had access to pattern fill, the startup screen wouldn't take
so long to fill with the X root weave!  Isn't it ridiculous that the
OpenWindows 3.0 startup is *perceptibly* slower when it fills the
screen the first time, because of NeWS code that simulates a pattern
fill, executing doubly nested "imagecanvas" loops to tile the screen
in 64x64 bit images of the "Industry Standard" X root weave pattern?
Wouldn't it be nice if NeWS could just call the same pattern fill code
X uses to fill the whole screen instantly? Isn't that a better
solution than dumping NeWS to make server startup faster?

> We need to now innovate within the framework we have created (which
> includes interoperability with X), not keep changing and
> destablizing it.

The framework is a cage. TNT was not designed to be boxed in, and
that's why it doesn't fit in with Sun's X based desktop, which hardly
approaches the mediocrity it strives for.  The inevitable fact we must
embrace is that Sun has painted itself into a corner, and there is no
room in that corner for TNT, with the deskset as bloated as it is and
swelling. The most direct and efficient approach to an "8 meg
solution" is an all NeWS desktop, but that's not politically correct
with certain people, and never has been, which is why we currently
have an all-X desktop.  Another approach is a no-NeWS desktop, which
certain people are pushing, even though they know it's not going to
work. This artificial short term "8 megabyte" problem is being used as
an excuse to push NeWS off the desktop, so XView can finish rotting
and OLIT can take over. Well OLIT ain't any smaller than XView, but
hey memory's cheap so long as you don't buy it from Sun! So even
though this memory fire drill is important enough to drive server
reform, and put NeWS in jepordy of being lobotomized into a Display
PostScript clone, our present crisis just isn't taken seriously enough
to justify putting any effort into doing something as "drastic" as
working towards an all NeWS desktop.  Just keep an eye on your 1.25
megabyte resident deskset clock, because memory isn't the only thing
you're wasting.

> Recent levels of cooperation on interoperability have been
> encouraging.  Isn't this the pathway toward success?

The cooperation has been encouraging, but in truth it is a departure
from the norm, and it came about much too late. The pathway we are on
leads to unmaintainable mediocrity, and you're dragging TNT down that
path. 

NeWSTech doesn't want to see NeWS destroyed. But that is the goal of
the managers who have been making the decisions for years, who drove
away all the engineers who cared, who are still making the same wishy
washy decisions, and *still* have the *nerve* to say they support
NeWS, just like old times. It's just the same as it's always been.  In
the face of that reality, it doesn't matter that Scott McNealy or Ed
Zander support NeWS -- they can keep you from dumping it, but they
can't keep you from destroying it.

If you tell anyone that NeWStech wants to kill NeWS, then you'd better
tell the whole story, that it is because *you* want to kill NeWS, and
you are and have always been in charge, and there's nothing we can do
about it, so we want a quick clean death right now, because otherwise
you will strangle it slowly.

	-Don

PS: Nothing personal.  All the "you"'s are collective and
indeterminate.  Most of the people in the window system group that I
knew personally, talked to, would ride by bike to Palo Alto to eat
lunch with, have left, so nobody tells me what's going on any more.
All the "I"'s and "we"'s are myself in whole or in part, since my
views and opinions in no way reflect the policies or practices of Sun
Microsystems.  I hope SunSoft can do better.
