Write a window turds virus. It randomly selects a window mapped on the
screen, and emits a succession of small turds from one of its corners.
They squeeze out of from underneath the window, and fall to the bottom
of the screen, where they all pile up.

This will be easy to implement with 2 1/2-D dynamics.

Stack of cards, with indexing tabs. An ordered stack of cards, with an
indexing strip along the bottom. Each card has a rectangular tab
sticking out below it, whose width is a function of the number of
cards and the card width, and whose horizintal position of its
position in the stack. Mouse down in a card's tab brings the card to
top.  With the button down, drag the mouse into another card's tab
(EnterWindow) and that card raises. You can flip through the cards in
order by dragging the mouse horizontally. You should be able to make
temporary and permanant changes to the order. Commands like pop, exch,
roll, etc... ((exch prev, exch next) (top, bottom) (delete copy) ...)

Half a pie menu can be used as a scroll bar. Scroll button at edge of
page. Press it and up pops an open book, the covers bent back to meet,
and the pages evenly spread over 180 degrees, with the covers
following the cursor, flipping pages from slice to slice.  Absolute
page positioning, or relative page flipping upon slice transition. You
could also scroll by line. Each slice puts the corresponding line of
the page at the top of the screen.  You can "crank" the menu to flip
from page to page. The opposite edge of the screen would crank the
opposite direction! A pair of these suckers could stick out like
window ears. 

How would it look to have instrumentation sticking out of the edge of
the window? (I don't care how fast it would run! I just want to see it
on the screen!)

NeWS 1.1: Screen snapshot tool. Makes a window that is rectangle with
a 1 pixel inset rectangular hole in it. Uses dashed lines to animate
edges like Mac. Writes out a pixrect file. 

Make a pty client: make a connection to the server, and open up a
terminal window. Run a program on one half of a pty, and forward I/O
between the other half and the server. Server can send commands that
send signals, do ioctls, request information, as out of band data
(evil), or whatever. That's how SoftTTY can send SIGWINCH's!

The pty client should be able to deal with losing the server. It
tries to reconnect to the server every several seconds, until such
time that it gives up. Once it's in, it restarts a terminal window and
reinitializes.
